---
layout: lab
title: Lab 4 - Gene interaction data and intro to R
hidden: true
---

In this lab, we will learn to work with **table data**. We'll use data from online databases, and view,
arrange, and analyze the data using the programing language `R`. The data that we'll focus on
is data on gene interactions, and data on gene annotations. Our goal is to develop techniques to 
test the hypothesis:

> The genes that cause a disease function in the same networks or pathways

## Step 1: Gene interaction data

In class, we discussed the [PSICQUIC](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/webservices/psicquic/view) federated database, a system for querying many autonomous
databases of gene interactions through one unified client. PSICQUIC is very powerful. However, its
output is difficult to process because the results from the different databases don't all have the same
format.

Instead, in Lab today, we'll use just one of these autonomous databases called [STRING](https://string-db.org/).
String is a relatively recent database that has many nice features. 

1. Start by going to the STRING website and doing a query for genes that interact with BRCA1 in humans.

2. Take a few minutes to explore the results.
> Questions:
> 
> - What information does STRING provide about each gene (ie Node)?
> - What information does STRING provide about each interaction (ie Edge)?
> - Why are 10 genes shown? Find a setting that controls how large the set of genes and interactions is.

3.  Click the **Exports** button. You'll see the interaction data in table format. We want to download this data so that we can process it. Click the **download** button for `... as simple tabular text output`. Save the file on your desktop as `BRCA1_String.tsv`. Open the file with `Notepad++`. 
> Note:
> 
> - In a text editor, a `tsv` file looks fairly ordered, but is still hard to read. The file would look pretty much like this if you used `head` or `cat` to view the file in BASH. 
> - The main thing to notice here is what separates the `fields` (or columns). In this file it is just `whitespace`. In a `csv` file, there would be a comma (`,`) separating each field. In a `tsv` file, it's actually the `TAB` character (not a space). This is important because then programs that read this file can tell the difference between a **value** with multiple words ("Gene 3"), and two values in different fields ("Gene" "3").

4. If you haven't worked with `R` before, you would probably open this file in `Excel`. Go ahead an do this. `Excel` understands the `tsv` format, and correctly separates the data into columns.
> Question:
> 
> - In Excel, can you sort the interactions by their experimental evidence? What is the strongest-supported interaction in this list?
> - In Excel, can you find all interactions that involve BRCA1 itself? How many are there?
> 
> Note:
> 
> -  Excel is relatively easy to use. However, it can cause lots of problems in Bioinformatics! One common problem is that Excel tries to be **too smart**. 
> - Try adding a new entry for an interaction between BRCA1 and SEPT2. What happens? What problems would this cause?

## Step 2. Intro to R.

Instead, let's load this same data table into `R`. 

First, open `RStudio`.

`Rstudio` is like an operating system designed for working in `R`. The RStudio program has its own Terminal (called `Console`), a File Explorer (called `Files`), and a text editor.

To use `R`, we enter commands in the `Console`. This is very much like entering commands in `Bash` - just the language is different.

First, we want to change the directory of our `R` session to our computer's desktop where our file is. In `R`, the command is:

```
setwd('~/Desktop')
```

This accomplishes the same thing as:
```{bash}
cd ~/Desktop
```

in Bash.

We can see the files in the current directory by typing:
```
list.files()
```

This accomplishes the same thing as:
```{bash}
ls
```

In Bash, the format of a command was:

```
command [arguments] [> output_file]
```

If we don't give an `output_file`, Bash writes the output to the screen. 
But we can **capture** the output in a file to store it and use it later.

In R, we refer to `functions` instead of `command`s or `program`s. The general format is:

```
output <- function(argument1,argument2,...)
```

Just like Bash, if we don't include `output <-`, R will print the output of the function to the screen.
But if you do, it will capture the output in the **variable** output. 
The language is different, but the idea is really the same! 
The main difference here is that `output_file` in Bash is a file on your hard-drive. It's permanent. 
But `output` in `R` is just held in memory. When you close `R`, `output` disappears! 
This is both good and bad. Good, because memory is MUCH faster than the hard-drive. Bad, because you have 
to save your work in some way more permanent.

### Scripts
Just like in Bash, we can write scripts in R to record the commands that we would type into the `Console`.

RStudio gives us a text editor to do this. But it has a nice feature:

Make a new `R Script`. Then type this line:

```
x <- 3
```

Now, put your cursor on the line and type `CTRL+Enter`. RStudio sends the command to the console and runs it!
No more copy + paste!

You can also run a whole script with the `Source` button in RStudio, or with the command:

```
source('my_file.R`)
```

R Scripts use comments just like Bash scripts. Just use the `#` character at the start of the line.

### Packages

Remember that on Farm, we had to type:

```
module load bio
```

to tell Bash to prepare the BLAST programs for us to use? 

R is the same, but instead of `modules`, R uses `packages` or `libraries`. For today's work, we need to load two packages:

```
library(tidyr) # for working with tables
library(biomaRt) # for downloading data from BioMart
```

If you get an error message for either library, you'll have to install these packages:

```
install.packages('tidyr')
source("https://bioconductor.org/biocLite.R")
biocLite("biomaRt")
```


### Loading data
Since R works with variables instead of files, we have to load data before we can use it.

```
brca1_data <- read.delim(file='BRCA1_String.tsv',header=TRUE,stringsAsFactors = FALSE)
```

Note in R Studio how as you type this line, it starts making suggestions for you. Enhanced auto-complete!

> Question:
>
> - What is the function? What are the arguments?


Nothing happens when we run this function, because we captured the output in the variable `brca1_data`.

How do we view this variable? In Unix, we used `echo`, `head`, `cat`, etc.

In R, we can:

1. Just type the variable name and hit `Enter`. This prints all (or most) to the screen
4. `View(brca1_data)`. RStudio's spreadsheet viewer.
2. `head(brca1_data)`. The first 6 lines
3. `glimpse(brca1_data)`

Things to note:

1. `Observations` are entries = rows.
2. `Variables` are features = columns.
3. Each column has a particular data type. `<chr>` is **character**, meaning text. `<dbl>` and `<int>` are numbers. It's important to check that this was imported correctly.
4. The name of the first column didn't import well (it starts with `X.`?) We can change it like this:

```
colnames(brca1_data)               # gets all the names of the columns
colnames(brca1_data)[1]            # gets only the first column name
colnames(brca1_data)[1] <- 'node1' # assigns the first column name a new value
colnames(brca1_data)               # check that it changed!
```

### Accessing data

We can access a row (a particular interaction) like this:

```
slice(brca1_data,1) # row 1
slice(brca1_data,10) # row 10
```

The arguments are: (1) Name of table variable, (2) row number to select

We can `filter` the rows like this:

```
filter(brca1_data,node1 == 'BRCA1')
filter(brca1_data,experimentally_determined_interaction > 0.5)
```

The arguments are: (1) Name of table variable, (2) filter criteria.

We can access a column (a feature) like this:

```
brca1_data$combined_score # get data from combined_score column
select(brca1_data,combined_score,node1) # select two columns
select(brca1_data,1:3) # select first three columns
```

> Each of these print the whole result to the screen. How would you print only the first 6 lines? The first 10?
>
> Hint: You can view all possible arguments to a function by typing `?head`

We can sort the data like this:

```
arrange(brca1_data,experimentally_determined_interaction)  # increasing values
arrange(brca1_data,desc(experimentally_determined_interaction)) # increasing values
```

We can make a new row like this:

```
new_interaction <- data_frame(node1='SEPT2', node2='MARCH1')
bind_rows(brca1_data,new_interaction)
```

It worked, but it filled in `NA` or `<NA>` for all the other columns because we didn't provide data for those.

### Saving tables

Once we've processed data, we have to save it to a new file, or it will be lost when we close R.

To save a table as a new `.tsv` file, do:

```
write.table(brca1_data,file = 'processed_BRCA1_interactions.tsv',row.names=FALSE,sep='\t')
```

> Activity:
>
> Select only interactions that include BRCA1, have experimentally_determined_interaction > 0.5,
and make a new table including only `node1`, `node2`, and `experimentally_determined_interaction` as columns. Save this as a file.

## Data integration

No that we've seen how to do basic data table processing in R, let's use these skills for some real bioinformatics.

The BRCA1 is known for its role in Breast Cancer. 

Remember our original hypothesis:

> The genes that cause a disease function in the same networks or pathways

Today, I'd like to try to address a related, but simpler hypothesis:

> Genes that interact with each other cause similar diseases

> Question:
>
> We now have a data table listing genes that interact. What do we need to test this hypothesis? Where could we get the data?

## Querying BioMart from R

The Ensembl BioMart of Human Genes has an **attribute** imported from the OMIM database describing diseases associated with each gene.

Go to [BioMart](http://www.ensembl.org/biomart/martview), and do a query for the BRCA1 human gene, and get its MIM disease annotations.

We want to do the following:

1. Get a list of all the genes in our data that interact directly with BRCA1
2. Run a BioMart query for all of these genes, extracting all their MIM disease annotations
3. Test if any sets of genes cause the same diseases
4. Select interactions that may be important for specific diseases

### List genes that interact with BRCA1

We can get this information from `brca1_data`

Filter interactions where node1 or node2 is BRCA1

```
brca1_interactions <- filter(brca1_data,node1=='BRCA1' | node2 == 'BRCA1')
```

Extract the node1 genes and the node2 genes. 

> Note: These are **exchangeable**. There's no direction of interaction information here

```
node1_genes <- brca1_interactions$node1  # we want the data
node2_genes <- brca1_interactions$node2
```

Combine these into one list

```
all_genes <- c(node1_genes,node2_genes)  # the function `c` appends two lists together
```

Find only the unique genes

```
unique_genes <- unique(all_genes)
```

### Set up a biomart query

Load the `biomaRt` package if you haven't:

```
library(biomaRt)
```

There are several steps to this. They follow very closely to what you do on the website.

### Find available marts (ie data warehouses)
```
listMarts(host = 'www.ensembl.org')
```

We want the `ensembl Genes 90` Mart. Select it:

```
ensembl = useMart('ENSEMBL_MART_ENSEMBL')
ensembl
```

The variable `ensembl` holds information about the connection between R and Ensembl

### Select a dataset

To view available datasets, do:

```
listDatasets(ensembl)
```

Find the one we want (`hsapiens_gene_ensembl`), and select it:

```
ensembl_human = useDataset('hsapiens_gene_ensembl',mart = ensembl)
ensembl_human
```

### Select filters and attributes for the query

To find available filters, do:

```
listFilters(ensembl_human)
```

Our gene names are HUGO names (a standardized human-readable gene name). The filter is: `hgnc_symbol`

To find available attributes, do:

```
listAttributes(ensembl_human)
```

We want our results to include both the HUGO ID and the MIM diseases: `mim_morbid_description`

### Run the query
```
mim_results <- getBM(mart = ensembl_human,
                     attributes = c('hgnc_symbol','mim_morbid_description'), # note how we make a list with the `c()` function
                     filters = c('hgnc_symbol'),
                     values = unique_genes # When we run, R will expand our the variable `unique_genes`, just like BASH did.
                     )
View(mim_results)
```


> Questions:
>
> Did all genes get annotations? Were all genes identified in Ensembl?
> Does each gene have a single disease annotation?

### Process results

Now, we want to address the question: do any genes in this set relate to the same disease?

For this, we'll use one of the most powerful tools in R for processing data: The **split-apply-combine** approach.

1. Split the data into different groups by rows
2. Apply a function separately to each group
3. Combine the results back into a new table

Here, we will do the following:

1. Split the annotation data by disease
2. For each disease, collect all genes associated
3. Combine into a table, one row for each disease, with all associated genes listed, plus a count of how many genes per disease

#### Split the annotation data by disease

To split the data, we tell R how we want it split:

```
mim_results <- group_by(mim_results,mim_morbid_description)
```

#### Apply a function separately to each group, combine the results

We want to apply two functions to each group:

1. `n()`: count how many rows (ie genes)
2. `toString()`: paste all gene names together into a single string (ie long word or sentence)

We use the `summarize` function:

```
mim_summary <- summarize(mim_results,
                          num_genes = n(),
                          gene_list = toString(hgnc_symbol))
View(mim_summary)
```

#### Sort the results to answer the question:
You can also do this in the SpreadSheet view directly

```
arrange(mim_summary,desc(num_genes))
```

> Questions:
>
> What diseases are associated with multiple genes in this set?
> Are there any **interactions** that where both genes cause the same disease? How would you address this question?


### Summary
To see how the **split-apply-combine** is working in more detail, think of it like a for loop (yes, we can use them in R too!)

```
summary_table <- data_frame() # make empty table to hold results
for(disease in unique(mim_results$mim_morbid_description)){  # Try to read this for loop syntax. It works just like the one in Bash!
  disease_results <- filter(mim_results,mim_morbid_description == disease) # select the subset of the rows for the current disease
  
  n <- nrow(disease_results)  # count the number of rows in the table for the current disease
  gene_list <- toString(disease_results$hgnc_symbol)  # paste together all the gene names
  
  disease_table <- data_frame(disease = disease, n = n, gene_list = gene_list) # make a small table to hold this disease's results
  
  summary_table <- bind_rows(summary_table,disease_table)    # append this disease's results to the full table
}
View(summary_table)
```

### Save the results in a `.tsv` file:

```
write.table(mim_summary,file = 'BRCA1_interactors_diseases.tsv',row.names=FALSE,sep='\t')
```

## Summary

Here is some more background

### What is `R`?

R is a programing language. It's primary purpose is for statistical analyses. 
But it's also very useful for general data science work, including Bioinformatics. 
R is **Open Source**, meaning that anyone can write programs in `R`, and share them for free.
Because of this, there are **packages** in R for almost any Bioinformatics task you will want to do.

For our purposes here, the main advantages of processing data tables in R vs Excel are:

- We can write scripts to automate tasks
- Scripts serve as documentation, or a lab notebook of what we did
- R doesn't do anything that you don't tell it to do (unlike Excel).
- R can process datafiles that are too large for Excel.
- R can connect directly to online databases

These are basically the same reasons why we use Bash and Unix rather than Windows for Bioinformatics!

### R resources:

[Data Wrangling Cheat Sheet](https://www.rstudio.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/data-wrangling-cheatsheet.pdf)

[Intro to R tutorial](http://www.datacarpentry.org/R-genomics/01-intro-to-R.html)

## Assignment

Repeat the activity we did here with your gene for Project 2.

1. Take your gene. Use String, or another database if you'd like to download interacting genes.
2. Import the data into R, and use R to get a list of all unique genes.
3. Use BioMart to download some attribute of the genes (MIM, GO annotation, Reactome reacting, KEGG pathway), 
and ask if multiple of the interacting genes have similar roles.
4. Prepare a brief report in markdown of what you found.

 