---
layout: lab
title: Lab 6 - Genome Browsers
hidden: true
---

# Goals

1. Use the UCSC Genome Browser to view genomic features
2. Visualize alternative isoforms at a locus
3. Identify candidate regulator regions around a gene
	

# Activity

## Introduction to the UCSC Genome Browser

1. Go to: [UCSC Genome Browser](http://genome.ucsc.edu/)
> The UCSC Genome Browser was one of the first to develop a technique for visualizing annotations along a genome. There are specialized genome browsers for many species (mostly vertebrates). The same technology has been duplicated in many other sites:
>  
> ex:
> 
> - [Ensembl - similar to UCSC](http://www.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Gene/Summary?db=core;g=ENSG00000139618;r=13:32315474-32400266)
> - [TAIR - Arabidopsis](https://gbrowse.arabidopsis.org/cgi-bin/gb2/gbrowse/arabidopsis/?name=Chr1%3A1509103..1510341)

2. Click on **Genome Browser**
> This page lists the genome browsers avaiable. Each species has a separte browser. Within species, there are different **Assembly versions**. Each assembly has a different **coordinate system**. There are tools for mapping annotations from one assembly to another (either within or between species).

3. Let's use the Human Assembly **GRCh38/hg38** (the most recent version). Lets view the locus around the gene **TAZ**.
> There are several ways of navigating to a locus:
> 
> - Enter a search term in the search bar: ex. `TAZ` or `NM_181311`
> - Enter a genome region: ex. `chrX:154,411,556-154,421,720`, read as chr:start-stop.
> - Search for a specific sequencing using BLAT (similar to BLAST).

4. Orientation to the default view of the genome browser:
> Note these features:
> 
> - Assembly verion
> - Chromosome coordinates
> - Location of view on chromosome
> - Scale of current view
> - **Tracks**: rows of data. Delinited by boxes on the left side.
> - **Features**: elements fo data inside each track

5. There are too many tracks. Let's remove some.
> - Hover your mouse over the last box. It gets highlighted. Note the title in the middle of the box: *Repeating Elements by RepeatMasker*
> - Right-click on the box, and select **Hide**
> - Also hide the **Common SNPs(150)**,**GTEx**,**OMIM Allelic Variants**, and **GENCODE v24** tracks. 

6. Change the format of the H3K27Ac track.
> H3K27Ac is a particular form of epigenetic modification that seems to be related to DNA accessibility for transcription factors.
> 
> - The default view shows a layered density plot for H3K27Ac values in 7 cell types. Click on the box on the left. This brings you to the info page for the track. We can specify that we want only the HUVEC cell type. Deselect the others, and click **Submit**.
> - We could also give a more condensed view of the track by right-clicking and selecting **Dense**. Explore the other options.

7. Add a track of **Pfam Domains**. Pfam is similar to the **Conserved Domain Database**. We used it earlier with **RPSBLAST** to find protein domains.
> Scroll down to the **Genes and Gene Predictions** section, find the **Pfam in UCSC Gene** menu, and select **pack**. Then click **refresh**. The track will appear in the display. You can drag it around ti find a better place to display.
> 
> Note that domains can be split across exons!

8. Adjust the display to see the neighboring genes
> - You can click and drag to move left and right.
> - You can use the **zoom out** buttons to expand the view. 
> - You can zoom in with the **zoom in** buttons, or by holding **Alt** and dragging over a region. If you zoom in enough, it will show you codons, and then even base pairs. To see, you may have to right-click on the left box of the top feature and select **full**.
> - You can highlight a region by holding **Option** and dragging over a region.

9. Export a Genome Browser view as a pdf.
> - When you have a view you like, you can click **View -> PDF/PS**, and select "Download the current browser graphic in PDF".

10. Export data based on regions.
> - Add the OMIM Allelic Variants track. 
> - Select **Tools -> Data Integrator**
> - under **position or search term**, enter **TAZ**. If you leave it as is, it will use the current region of the browser
> - Under **Configure Data Sources**, select **Phenotype**, then **OMIM Alleles**, then click Add
> - Click **Get output**
> - A table will come up with format similar to BED listing the locations of OMIM variants inside the gene.
> - To view information on a particular variant, you can search for the OMIM ID at [OMIM](https://www.omim.org), or: Go back to the Genome Browser view, and click on the variant. This will bring up an info page on the variant, with links back to OMIM.

## Assignment

Answer the following questions:

1. What strand is the TAZ gene on?
2. List the 3 nearest genes upstream (towards the centromere) relative to DNASE1L1
3. Where relative to gene features is the H3K27Ac presence highest?
4. Note the double-lines in the MultiZ alignments of other vertebrate species. What do the double-lines mean? (google, or look in the help pages)
5. Create a figure using the genome browser to highlight one potentially important feature around your gene that may be relevant to its role in disease.

> Create a genome browser view for your gene. 
> 
> - You could show just the gene. You could zoom out to show the neighboring region. You could zoom in on particular features you'd like to highlight. 
> - You can show multiple views if that helps describe your finding
> - Include at least two tracks, and refer to both in your description. Remove unnecessary tracks
