---
layout: lab
title: Lab 7 - Genome-wide association study
hidden: true
---

# Goals

1. Use the GWAS Catalog to find variants associated with specific traits
2. Understand statistics reported in GWAS studies
3. Predict the functional effects of specific allelic variants
	


## Introduction to GWAS Catalog

The GWAS Catalog is operated by the National Human Genome Research Institute and the European Bioinformatics Institute. The Catalog is a quality controlled, manually curated, collection of all published genome-wide association studies assaying at least 100,000 SNPs and all SNP-trait associations with p-values < 1.0 x 10<sup>-5</sup>. 

> There is a similar catolog in *Arabidopsis*: [AraGWAS](https://aragwas.1001genomes.org) developed within the *Arabidopsis* 1001 Genome project


## Activity

1) Go to: [GWAS Catalog](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas/)

The GWAS Catalog has several entry points to the database. You can get an overview of all SNP trait associations under **Diagram**, **Search** for specific variants, traits, publications, etc, **Download** all data or specific subsetsets, etc. We'll explore some of these functions

2) Click on **Diagram**.
> In this diagram, each colored dot represents a SNP-trait associations with p-value ≤ 5.0 × 10<sup>-8</sup>. These are considered "Genome-Wide significant" loci. There are a lot!
> 
> To highlight particular associations, we can filter this figure. First click on the "Metabolic disease" button on the left. This filters for ~300 associations with particular 
> 
> **Note:** This page is slow. Sometimes you have to wait for it to finish!
> 
> If you hover your mouse over a particular association, it will list the specific Metabolic disease, and you can click on the association for more information. 
> 
> You can filter more by typing a specific trait into the Filter box. 


3) Go back to the **Home**, and use the search bar to find loci associated with **height**.
> There are several ways of searching:
> 
> - Enter a disease name: ex. `breast cancer`
> - Enter a genome region: ex. `6:16000000-25000000`, read as chr:start-stop.
> - Enter a SNP name: ex. `rs7329174`.

If you type `height` into the bar, it'll suggest several types of `height` traits. Note that this is a **controlled vocabulary**. This is necessary to group different studies together because each may use the word `height` in different ways. 

> Click on the first: `body height`.
> 
> On the `Trait: body height` page, the first box describes the trait. On the right is a buttom for `Trait in OLS`. The OLS is a trait-ontology. Click the button and find two related traits.

Further down the `Trait: body height` page, you find a table of associations. How many are there?

> **Question:** Are all these associations with `body height` per se? 

> What is the first association listed? Here are some definitions of the columns in the table:
> 
> - **RAF**: Risk/effect allele frequency in controls 
> - **P-value**: change of a random allele being at least this strongly associated with the trait.
> - **OR**: Odds ratio associate with SNP
> - **Beta**: Effect size of the association (in this case change in height if you carry the alternate (ie risk) allele
> - **CI**: 95% confidence interval for the effect size
> - **Mapped gene**: Any known genes in this region
>
> **Task:** Find the genomic location of this variant
> 
> **Question:** Why is this variant listed first? Is it the most important?

> Scroll down to the bottom of the trait page. There is a **Manhattan Plot** of all the associations with body height. 
> 
> **Question:** Are there any regions of the genome that seem to have a lot of asociations? Few assocations?

4) Click on the a SNP with a large effect on height.

> Has this locus been association with height in other studies? 
> 
> Has it been association with other traits?
> 
> What alleles are known?

Once you have a particular SNP selected, this is where the bioinformatic tools of EMBL really shine.

> There are several buttons on the right of the `Variant information` box. These all link to other sites with specific types of information on this variant. 

5) Click on **Genomic context**. 
> This brings you to a genome browser view similar to what we worked with last week. Play around with the different tracks and see what kind of information you can find.

6) Click on **Genes and regulation**. 
> This page predicts the effect of this particular variant on things like gene regulation or function.
> 
> **Question** how can this information be used with GWAS? Should we infer that these specific regulatory or functional changes impact human height? Why or why not?

7) Click on **Population genetics**

> Check the allele frequencies in different population. Do certain populations have high prevelance of this SNP? 
>
> On this page, there is a lot more information about this variant. On the left, you'll find a link to a page on **Linkage disequilibrium**. Click on this. 
> 
> Choose two populations and view their **LD plot**s for this variant. How similar are the LDs among populations? Find another variant in each population that has high LD with your SNP.

## Assignment

Repeat the activity above for a disease or trait of your choice. Turn in answers to each of the questions listed above.
