---
layout: lab
title: Lab 4 - Gene interaction data and intro to R
hidden: true
---

## Intro

In this lab, we will learn to work with **table data**. We'll use data from online databases, and view,
arrange, and analyze the data using the programing language `R`. The data that we'll focus on
is data on gene interactions, and data on gene expression. We will use data integration to identify a set of candidate gene interactions to explain the effect of variation in the gene **BRCA1**.

The overall outline is:

1. Query a database of gene interactions for BRCA1
2. Download a **table** of the interaction data
3. Find and download database of gene expression by tissue
4. Inspect both data tables, and identify common **keys**
5. Use **BioMart** to create a new table to match the **keys** between our two tables
6. Use **R** to test whether each pair of interacting genes is expressed in the same tissue

The main skills we will learn are about processing data in **R**. We will cover:

1. Importing table data
2. **Filtering** tables
3. **Sorting** tables (arranging)
4. Parsing columns in tables
4. **joining** tables
5. **intersecting** lists
5. **for** loops in R

## Step 1: Gene interaction data

In class, we discussed the [PSICQUIC](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/webservices/psicquic/view) federated database, a system for querying many autonomous
databases of gene interactions through one unified client. PSICQUIC is very powerful. However, its
output is difficult to process because the results from the different databases don't all have the same
format.

Instead, in Lab today, we'll use just one of these autonomous databases called [STRING](https://string-db.org/).
String is a relatively recent database that has many nice features. 

1. Start by going to the STRING website and doing a query for genes that interact with BRCA1 in humans.

2. Take a few minutes to explore the results.
> Questions:
> 
> - What information does STRING provide about each gene (ie Node)?
> - What information does STRING provide about each interaction (ie Edge)?
> - Why are 10 genes shown? Find a setting that controls how large the set of genes and interactions is.

3.  Click the **Exports** button. You'll see the interaction data in table format. We want to download this data so that we can process it. Click the **download** button for `... as simple tabular text output`. Save the file on your desktop as `BRCA1_String.tsv`. Open the file with `Notepad++`. 
> Note:
> 
> - In a text editor, a `tsv` file looks fairly ordered, but is still hard to read. The file would look pretty much like this if you used `head` or `cat` to view the file in BASH. 
> - The main thing to notice here is what separates the `fields` (or columns). In this file it is just `whitespace`. In a `csv` file, there would be a comma (`,`) separating each field. In a `tsv` file, it's actually the `TAB` character (not a space). This is important because then programs that read this file can tell the difference between a **value** with multiple words ("Gene 3"), and two values in different fields ("Gene" "3").

4. If you haven't worked with `R` before, you would probably open this file in `Excel`. Go ahead an do this. `Excel` understands the `tsv` format, and correctly separates the data into columns.
> Question:
> 
> - In Excel, can you sort the interactions by their experimental evidence? What is the strongest-supported interaction in this list?
> - In Excel, can you find all interactions that involve BRCA1 itself? How many are there?
> 
> Note:
> 
> -  Excel is relatively easy to use. However, it can cause lots of problems in Bioinformatics! One common problem is that Excel tries to be **too smart**. 
> - Try adding a new entry for an interaction between BRCA1 and SEPT2. What happens? What problems would this cause?

## Step 2. Gene Expression data

Our goal in this exercise is to identify which of the potentially interacting genes in the **String** network are actually expressed in the same tissues. For this, we'll use a database called [The Human Protein Atlas](https://www.proteinatlas.org/). Go to this database and try to find a place to download a table of expression profiles for proteins in human tissues. 

Once you find this file, download it, and then try to open it in **Excel**. 

> You'll get an error. **Why?**

> If **Excel** completely fails to open the file, you  can open it in **Notepad++** for now.

Notice the structure of this data. Is it **rectangular**? What does each **entry** represent?

> Question:
> 
> Lets make a plan for how we can merge these two tables.
> 
> 1. What **feature** from each table should we use to merge the data?
>     - Are there any features in common that we can use as **keys**?
>     - If not, what type of table do we need to match **keys**?
> 2. Are the relationships between the table **one-one**, **one-many**, or **many-many**?
> 3. How can we address the question:
>     - **Is each pair of interacting genes is expressed in the same tissue?**

## Step 3. ID translation using Biomart

The most useful **keys** from the **String** table are the columns:
**node1\_external\_id** and **node2\_external\_id**.

> Why not **node1** and **node2**?

**node1\_external\_id** and **node2\_external\_id** are ENSEMBL protein IDs (you can tell because they begin `ENSP`).

The gene expression table doesn't list ENSEMBL protein IDs, but does list ENSEMBL gene IDs. So we need a way of matching between these two types of IDs. [BioMart](http://uswest.ensembl.org/biomart/martview) is a tool that can build us this type of table.

Here's a quick tutorial on using BioMart to make our table:

1. Under `CHOOSE DATABASE`, select `ENSEMBL GENES 94`.
2. Under `CHOOSE DATASET`, select `Human genes`.
3. Now, select `Filters`, then `GENE`. We could input a list of `Gene stable ID(s)`, or other filters here. But for now, we can leave this blank to get all genes.
4. Now, select `Attributes`, then `Features`, then under `GENE`, select `Gene stable ID` and `Protein stable ID`. De-select any other features. These are the only two that we need.
5. Now, click `Count`. We see that our dataset contains all possible genes.
6. Now, click `Results`. We get a very little table that looks mostly empty. This is because the first 10 genes don't have corresponding proteins! But expand this View to 100 rows. Scroll down, and see that some genes do have protein IDs.
7. But we don't want to manually copy all this. Instead, under `Export`, click `Go`. It'll take a minute or so, then a file called `mart_export.txt` will be downloaded to your computer. Re-name this file `Gene_to_Protein.tsv`, and then open it in `Notepad++`.  This will be our **key translation** table.

Now we have all the data we need for our analysis.

## Step 2. Intro to R.

Instead, let's load this same data table into `R`. 

First, open `RStudio`.

`Rstudio` is like an operating system designed for working in `R`. The RStudio program has its own Terminal (called `Console`), a File Explorer (called `Files`), and a text editor.

To use `R`, we enter commands in the `Console`. This is very much like entering commands in `Bash` - just the language is different.

First, we want to change the directory of our `R` session to our computer's desktop where our file is. In `R`, the command is:

```
setwd('~/Desktop')
```

This accomplishes the same thing as:
```{bash}
cd ~/Desktop
```

in Bash.

We can see the files in the current directory by typing:
```
list.files()
```

This accomplishes the same thing as:
```{bash}
ls
```

In Bash, the format of a command was:

```
command [arguments] [> output_file]
```

If we don't give an `output_file`, Bash writes the output to the screen. 
But we can **capture** the output in a file to store it and use it later.

In R, we refer to `functions` instead of `commands` or `programs`. The general format is:

```
output <- function(argument1,argument2,...)
```

Just like Bash, if we don't include `output <-`, R will print the output of the function to the screen.
But if you do, it will capture the output in the **variable** output. 
The language is different, but the idea is really the same! 
The main difference here is that `output_file` in Bash is a file on your hard-drive. It's permanent. 
But `output` in `R` is just held in memory. When you close `R`, `output` disappears! 
This is both good and bad. Good, because memory is MUCH faster than the hard-drive. Bad, because you have 
to save your work in some way more permanent.

### Scripts
Just like in Bash, we can write scripts in R to record the commands that we would type into the `Console`.

RStudio gives us a text editor to do this. But it has a nice feature:

Make a new `R Script`. Then type this line:

```
x <- 3
```

Now, put your cursor on the line and type `CTRL+Enter`. RStudio sends the command to the console and runs it!
No more copy + paste!

You can also run a whole script with the `Source` button in RStudio, or with the command:

```
source('my_file.R`)
```

R Scripts use comments just like Bash scripts. Just use the `#` character at the start of the line.

### Packages

Remember that on Farm, we had to type:

```
module load bio
```

to tell Bash to prepare the BLAST programs for us to use? 

R is the same, but instead of `modules`, R uses `packages` or `libraries`. For today's work, we need to load three packages:

```
library(dplyr) 
library(tidyr) 
library(readr)
```

If you get an error message for any of the libraries, you'll have to install these packages:

```
install.packages('dplyr')
install.packages('tidyr')
install.packages('readr')
```


### Loading data
Since R works with variables instead of files, we have to load data before we can use it.

```
brca1_data <- read_tsv(file='BRCA1_String.tsv')
```

Note in R Studio how as you type this line, it starts making suggestions for you. Enhanced auto-complete!

> Question:
>
> - What is the function? What are the arguments?


When we run the command, **R** prints out a message with a summary of how the data were read. But it doesn't print out the table itself. The table is stored in **memory** in the variable named `brca1_data`.

How do we view this variable? In Unix, we used `echo`, `head`, `cat`, etc.

In R, we can:

1. Just type the variable name and hit `Enter`. This prints all (or most) to the screen
4. `View(brca1_data)`. RStudio's spreadsheet viewer.
2. `head(brca1_data)`. The first 6 lines
3. `glimpse(brca1_data)`

Things to note:

1. `Observations` are entries = rows.
2. `Variables` are features = columns.
3. Each column has a particular data type. `<chr>` is **character**, meaning text. `<dbl>` and `<int>` are numbers. It's important to check that this was imported correctly.
4. The name of the first column didn't import well (it starts with `bbb#`?) We can change it like this:

```
colnames(brca1_data)               # gets all the names of the columns
colnames(brca1_data)[1]            # gets only the first column name
colnames(brca1_data)[1] <- 'node1' # assigns the first column name a new value
colnames(brca1_data)               # check that it changed!
```

### Accessing data

We can access a row (a particular interaction) like this:

```
slice(brca1_data,1) # row 1
slice(brca1_data,10) # row 10
```

The arguments are: (1) Name of table variable, (2) row number to select

We can `filter` the rows like this:

```
filter(brca1_data,node1 == 'BRCA1')
filter(brca1_data,experimentally_determined_interaction > 0.5)
```

The arguments are: (1) Name of table variable, (2) filter criteria.

We can access a column (a feature) like this:

```
brca1_data$combined_score # get data from combined_score column
select(brca1_data,combined_score,node1) # select two columns
select(brca1_data,1:3) # select first three columns
```

> Each of these print the whole result to the screen. How would you print only the first 6 lines? The first 10?
>
> Hint: You can view all possible arguments to a function by typing `?head`

We can sort the data like this:

```
arrange(brca1_data,experimentally_determined_interaction)  # increasing values
arrange(brca1_data,desc(experimentally_determined_interaction)) # increasing values
```

We can make a new row like this:

```
new_interaction <- data_frame(node1='SEPT2', node2='MARCH1')
brca1_data_addRow <- bind_rows(brca1_data,new_interaction)
tail(brca1_data_addRow)
```

It worked, but it filled in `NA` or `<NA>` for all the other columns because we didn't provide data for those.

### Saving tables

Once we've processed data, we have to save it to a new file, or it will be lost when we close R.

To save a table as a new `.tsv` file, do:

```
write_tsv(brca1_data,path = 'processed_BRCA1_interactions.tsv')
```

> Activity:
>
> Select only interactions that include BRCA1, have experimentally_determined_interaction > 0.5,
and make a new table including only `node1`, `node2`, and `experimentally_determined_interaction` as columns. Save this as a file.

## Data integration

No that we've seen how to do basic data table processing in R, let's use these skills for some real bioinformatics.

Remember, our goal is to identify which of the potential interactions in the **String** network involve genes expressed in the same tissue.

We have two additional tables we can use:

- `normal_tissue.tsv`, downloaded from the Human Protein Atlas
- `Gene_to_Protein.tsv`, downloaded from BioMart

We need to:

1. Load both datasets into **R**
2. Add a new column to the expression data table for ENSEMBLE Gene ID so that we can match to the `brca1_data` table
3. Filter the expression data for expressed gene:tissue pairs
4. For each interaction, pull out the tissues of expression for each gene, identify the overlapping tissues

### Load both datasets

You should be able to do this now. 

- Load the expression data into a variable called `tissue_expression`.
- Load the ID mapping data into a variable called `gene_to_protein`.

### Inspect the datasets

Glance at the `tissue_expression` table, using `glimpse()` or `head()`

```
glimpse(tissue_expression)
```

Note that the column names #'s: `Gene name` and `Cell type` both have spaces in them. To show them, R has to surround them with the `` ` `` character. To access these columns, you also have to surround the name with this character:

```
tissue_expression$`Gene name`
```

If you try:
```
tissue_expression$Gene name
```

you'll get an error.

To make this table easier to use, let's change the name of these two columns so they don't have a space:

```
glimpse(tissue_expression)
colnames(tissue_expression)[2] = 'Gene_name'
colnames(tissue_expression)[4] = 'Cell_type'
glimpse(tissue_expression)
```

> Do the same for the `gene_to_protein` table. Call the new column names `Gene_stable_ID' and `Protein_stable_ID`

### Add a new column to the `tissue_expression` table for Protein ID

Merging two tables is called **joining**. We can use the `*_join(table_1,table_2,by=c("col_in_1" = "col_in_2"))` functions to do the merge:

- `left_join(table_1,table_2,by=c("col_in_1" = "col_in_2"))` merges the second table into the first keeping all rows from the first, but not necessarily all rows from the second, where the merge is based on the entries in `col_in_1` from the first table and `col_in_2` from the second table
- `right_join` is the same, but keeping all rows from the right table
- `full_join` keeps all rows from both tables
- `inner_join` only keeps rows that are present in both tables
- see `?left_join` for more information


To join the `tissue_expression` and `gene_to_protein` tables, we can do this:

```
tissue_expression <- left_join(tissue_expression,gene_to_protein,by=c("Gene"="Gene_stable_ID"))
```

**Note**, we assign the result of the `left_join` function back to the same variable `tissue_expresion`. 

View the results:

```
glimpse(tissue_expression)
```

We can see the new column in the table. Note: not every gene has a Protein ID. 

### Inspect `brca1_data`

Carefully inspect the `brca1_data` table again:

```
glimpse(brca1_data)
```

> Is there a column that we can use to link this table to the `tissue_expression` table?

No. But the `node1_external_id` and `node2_external_id` columns are close. But they're unfortunately formatted with two different IDs pasted together with a `.`. We're going to have to parse these two columns to get a column that just has the ENSEMBL Protein ID for each node. Fortunately, that's pretty easy to do using the `separate` function:

We do this separately for each node, splitting this column into two new columns called `nodeX_ID` and `ENSP_X`:

```
brca1_data <- separate(data=brca1_data,col='node1_external_id',into=c("node1_ID","ENSP_1"))
brca1_data <- separate(data=brca1_data,col='node2_external_id',into=c("node2_ID","ENSP_2"))
glimpse(brca1_data)
```

Now, let's check that each of the Protein ID's from the `brca1_data` table is present in the `tissue_expression` table:

```
brca1_data$ENSP_1 %in% tissue_expression$Protein_stable_ID
brca1_data$ENSP_2 %in% tissue_expression$Protein_stable_ID
```

Not all of them are there. These nodes we can't analyze, so we might as well just drop them from our interaction data.

> Go ahead and filter `brac1_data` to include only rows where both nodes have `ENSP` ID's that are present in the `tissue_expression` table
> 
> You should end up with a table with only 43 rows (interaction pairs)


## Analysis

Now, we have two compatible tables: 

- `brca1_data` contains 43 interactions between pairs of genes (nodes).
- `tissue_expression` contains ~9 million tissue:expression values

Our goal is to check whether each pair of genes is expressed together in the same tissue.

We'll start by just analyzing the first pair:

#### First, pull out the keys for the two genes, so that we can filter the `tissue_expression` table
```
node1_ID = brca1_data$ENSP_1[1] # pull out the key for the first gene
node2_ID = brca1_data$ENSP_2[1] # pull out the key for the second gene
```

#### Second, pull out the expression values for each gene
```
node1_expression = filter(tissue_expression,Protein_stable_ID == node1_ID)
node2_expression = filter(tissue_expression,Protein_stable_ID == node2_ID)
```

Now, filter each table to only list Tissues where the expression is `High` or `Medium`

```
node1_expression = filter(node1_expression, Level %in% c("High","Medium"))
node2_expression = filter(node2_expression, Level %in% c("High","Medium"))
```

Here are lists of tissues with moderate-high expression for each gene:
```
node1_expression$Tissue
node2_expression$Tissue
```

We can find the tissues where both are expressed like this:
```
common_tissues = intersect(node1_expression$Tissue,node2_expression$Tissue)
```

We can see the list of tissues like this:
```
common_tissues
```

Or count it's length like this:

```
length(common_tissues)
```

So these two genes are expressed together in 31 different tissues. This seems like a pretty plausible interaction!

> What about the other 42 interactions? How can we automate this analysis?


### Automated analysis

For this, we'll use a **for loop**, just like we did in **Unix**. The syntax is a little different, but the idea is the same!

Basically, we'll just put all those lines we just used for the first interaction into the body of the loop. Then, we'll **iterate** over each row of the table, run those lines for each row, and then collect the results in a new table.

The result will look like this:

```
for(row in 1:nrow(brca1_data)) {
	print(row)
	# other commands to do the actual analysis for this row of the table
}
```

#### First, create a new table to hold the results:
```
summary_table = data_frame() # this creates an empty table
```

#### Now, expand the for loop by adding the commands from above 
```
for(row in 1:nrow(brca1_data)){  
	print(row)
	# other commands to do the actual analysis for this row of the table

	# extract the ENSP IDs for the two nodes
	node1_ID = brca1_data$ENSP_1[row] # pull out the key for the first gene
	node2_ID = brca1_data$ENSP_2[row] # pull out the key for the second gene

	# use filter to get the gene expression data for each protein
	node1_expression = filter(tissue_expression,Protein_stable_ID == node1_ID)
	node2_expression = filter(tissue_expression,Protein_stable_ID == node2_ID)
  
  # filter these tables for only High and Medium-expressed genes
  node1_expression = filter(node1_expression, Level %in% c("High","Medium"))
	node2_expression = filter(node2_expression, Level %in% c("High","Medium"))

	# make a list of the tissues in common
  common_tissues = intersect(node1_expression$Tissue,node2_expression$Tissue)
  
  # count the number of tissues in common
  num_common_tissues = length(common_tissues)
  
  # form the list of tissues into a single String so we can store the result in a cell of the table
  tissue_list = toString(common_tissues)
  
  # build a new one-row table with all these results
  interaction_table <- data_frame(
			  node1_name = brca1_data$node1[row], # this pulls out the actual gene name
			  node2_name = brca1_data$node2[row],
			  num_common_tissues = num_common_tissues,
			  tissue_list = tissue_list
			) 
  
   # append this disease's results to the full table
  summary_table <- bind_rows(summary_table, interaction_table)    

}
```
#### View the results
```
View(summary_table)
```

> Which interactions share the most tissues? The fewest?

#### Make a histogram of the number of shared tissues

```
hist(summary_table$num_common_tissues)
```

A few interactions are very common across tissues, but many are very tissue-restricted.

### Save the results in a `.tsv` file:

```
write_tsv(summary_table,path = 'BRCA1_interactors_common_expression.tsv')
```

## Summary

Here is some more background

### What is `R`?

R is a programing language. It's primary purpose is for statistical analyses. 
But it's also very useful for general data science work, including Bioinformatics. 
R is **Open Source**, meaning that anyone can write programs in `R`, and share them for free.
Because of this, there are **packages** in R for almost any Bioinformatics task you will want to do.

For our purposes here, the main advantages of processing data tables in R vs Excel are:

- We can write scripts to automate tasks
- Scripts serve as documentation, or a lab notebook of what we did
- R doesn't do anything that you don't tell it to do (unlike Excel).
- R can process datafiles that are too large for Excel.
- R can connect directly to online databases

These are basically the same reasons why we use Bash and Unix rather than Windows for Bioinformatics!

### R resources:

[Data Wrangling Cheat Sheet](https://www.rstudio.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/data-wrangling-cheatsheet.pdf)

[Intro to R tutorial](http://www.datacarpentry.org/R-genomics/01-intro-to-R.html)

## Assignment

Turn in answers to these questions as an html file on Canvas

1. Repeat the analysis for only tissues where gene expression is classified as "High". Which interacting pairs are highly expressed in the same tissue?
2. One explanation for why `ATM` and `BRIP1` may show up so many times togther, while `UIMC1` and `TP53` may not is that the former are **each** highly expressed in most or all tissues, while the latter are only highly expressed in a few tissues. Is this true? Modify the above analysis to find out.
	- hint: you probably don't need to run a for-loop for this question.

Going forward, consider analyses like this for Project 2 itself!

 