---
layout: lab
title: Lab 2 - Bash automation
hidden: true
---

# Outline:
- Automation in Unix
- Intro to using a computer cluster

# Projects
- After the tutorials today, there will hopefully be time to work on your database projects. The projects are due next Thursday in Lecture. In lecture, you will each be expected to give a short (3-5 minute) presentation of your database to your group. We'll then collect and summarize the range of databases you explore as a class.


# Unix tutorial

In Lab 1, we covered commands to move around the Unix file system. These included:

- `pwd`: List the current working directory
-  `cd`: Change to a new directory
-  `ls`: list files, folders, and programs
-  `man`: view the help page for a program

We also covered the basic structure of a unix command:

`command -argument input_file > output_file`

These commands are summarized in the file: [Unix commands cheatsheat]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url supplements/2017-09-27-unix_commands %})

Today, we will continue this tutorial. We will focus on how to automate actions in Unix. This includes:

- wild cards
- scripts
- for loops

We will also cover some other useful commands including:

- `cat`, `echo`, `mv`
- `head`, `tail`, `less`, `wc`


## Refresher activity

Open the data-shell directory in `Git BASH`. Type:

```
ls -F
```

There is a folder called `Desktop`. Inside it is a folder called `hidden`. Somewhere inside that folder is a file called `youfoundit.txt`. Find the file. Once you've found it, enter the command:

```
cat youfoundit.txt
```

The command `cat` takes as input a file name, and simply reads the file and prints its output to the screen.

## Automation-1

Now, we'll return to processing Nelle's data files using the `goostats` program.

Return to the `data_shell` directory, and then go to the `north-pacific-gyre/2012-07-03` folder.

Remember, the command to process a file looks like:

```
programs/goostat NENE01729A.txt > output_NENE01729A.txt
```

Process the first three files: `NENE01729A.txt`, `NENE01729B.txt`, and `NENE02040A.txt`. Use the `up-arrow` to repeat the previous command, and then the arrow keys to modify it. You can open the folder in Windows File-Explorer to see the output files. Or type `ls -F`.

### Cleaning up our mess

Note that with these output files, our data directory is getting messy. It would be nicer to have the raw data files in one folder and the output files in another folder.

Let's make an output folder, and move our output files there. On Windows, you could create a new directory. In BASH, type:

```
mkdir output
```

On Windows, you could select each file and drag it to the folder. In BASH, type:

```
mv output_NENE01729A.txt output/
```

You can also re-name files with the `mv` command:

```
mv output/output_NENE01729B.txt output/renamed_file.txt
```

**Note**: We didn't have to move to the `output` directory to do this renaming. We just gave the relative path to the file.

#### Wildcards

Remember, BASH is all about automation. We don't have to type the `mv` command for each file separately. We can use a wild-card to select all the output files at once:

``` 
mv output* output/
```

The `*` character matches any set of character. Before running the `mv` command, BASH first expands `output*` to all files that start with `output`, and then contain 0 or more additional characters. It then passes them all to mv command.

**Hint** There's no `UNDO` in BASH! It's always a good idea to test out a BASH command like this before you run it. Before running a command, you can use the command `echo` to print out exactly what BASH is going to do:

```
echo "mv output* output/"
```

Be sure to put the command in quotes.

`echo` is similar to `cat`, except for commands instead of files. `cat` prints the contents of the file to the screen. `echo` prints the command itself to the screen.

```
echo "Some text"
echo "output*"
```

You don't always need the quotes, but it's a good habid.

Wildcards work with many commands. Try it with `ls`:

```
ls -F NENE*
```

### Activity:
Find all files that have the character `A` in them. How many are there?

**Before continuing, all output files should be in the output folder.**

## Automation-2

Wildcards are one way to automate. Scripts are another.

Run `goostat` again, but this time write directly into the `output` folder.

Remember the command? You can find it by typing `history`.

1. Open `Notepad++`. Copy the comand, paste it there
2. Paste it several times
3. Replace the file name with the others in the directory.
4. Copy it all, paste it in terminal.
5. Is this easier? No. **But it's documented!**
6. Alternatively, save it as `process_goostats.sh`. **Be sure to change character encoding to Unix**.
7. Run with `bash process_goostats.sh`

### For-loops

But, we can tell Bash to automate the creation of each of these lines.

Computers are great a repetitive tasks like this. They do it faster, with fewer mistakes.

A **for loop** is a tool for repeating the same action several times with a different input each time.

```
for file in *.txt
do
  programs/goostat $file > output/output_$file
done
```

The loop has several parts:

1. `for file in *.txt`: This declares the loop and the input for each iteration.
	2. `*.txt` gives a list of files. We can view the list with `echo *.txt`. Lists in Bash are separate by spaces
	3. `file` is a **variable**. What the loop will do is it will take the name of the first file from the list, and assign it to the variable `file`. It will then run the lines between `do` and `done`. Once those lines are done, it will assign the next file name to the variable `file`.
	4. Inside the `do/done` block, we can refer to the actual file name by typing `$file`, or better `${file}`. When bash sees `$file`, it replaces it with the file name stored in the variable.
	4. Do: `file=NENE01729A.txt`, and then `echo $file`. Try `echo file`.
	5. Now, do: `file=some_other_file.txt`, and then `echo $file`.

Before we run the script, let's test it. Replace the line `program...` with `echo "program..."`. Then copy the lines and paste into the terminal. 

**This just wrote out exactly what we were trying to do by hand!** We could copy these lines. We could copy these lines into a new script, and then run it with `bash process_all.sh`. But, instead, if we just remove the `echo`, and run the loop, it will send these lines directly to the Bash engine and execute them!

Do this, then run the script with `bash process_goostats.sh`

### Make a nicer script.

Scripts are both a tool for automation, and also a tool for documentation. If you write your scripts well, they both save you time now, and also help when you come back later and want to do the same or similar actions again, or when you have to write up your methods.

We can do several things to make this script nicer. 

1. Add comments. You can write lines in your script that begin with the hash character `#`. Bash will ignore these lines:
```
# echo some text
```
2. We can add a line that tells us what the computer is currently doing:
```
echo "Currently processing file $file"
```

### Activity:

Write a script to process all pairs of files using the program `goodiff`. Concatenate the output into one file that looks like:

|  |  |  |
|-------|-------|-------|
| file1 | file2 | score |
| file1 | file3 | score |
| file2 | file3 | score |

Hints:

Everything that shows up on the screen can be written instead to a file. Try and compare these lines:

```
# using echo
echo "my text"
echo "my text" > my_file.txt

# using cat
cat my_file.txt
cat my_file.txt > new_file.txt
cat new_file.txt
cat my_file.txt >> new_file.txt
cat new_file.txt
```

**Note:** 

- A single ">" says: "create a new file with this name and capture the output into this file".
- Two ">>" says: "append the output to the end of the existing file (and create a new file if needed)"


## Things to remember:

- Bash identifies separate arguments to commands by spaces. This means that spaces in file names cause problems
	- This is why you should enclose commands in quotation marks `"`. Things in quotation marks are interpreted as being part of the same argument

1. In Notepad++, create a file called `My File.txt`. Put some text in it.
2. In Bash, type: `cat My File.txt`. You get an error
3. Try: `cat "My File.txt"`. It works!
4. Try: `file="My File.txt"`, and then `cat $file`. You get an error.
5. Try `cat "$file"`. It works!


Other helpful commands:

- `wc file` Counts the number of lines, words, and characters in a file
- `head file` Prints the first 10 lines of a file. You can change the number with the `-n 3` option (replacing 3 with the number you want.
- `tail file` Prints the last 10 lines of a file.
- `less file` Gives an interactive view of the file. You can page-down using space or the arrow keys. To exit, type `q`. The `man` command uses `less` to show the help file for each command.

