---
layout: lab
title: Lab 1 - Intro to Bioinformatics Databases
hidden: true
---

## 1. Lab intro

## 2. Answer questions about Human Hemoglobin - subunit beta

### What chromosome is HBB on?
### How many exons does this gene have?
### Briefly describe how the gene works.
### What diseases are caused by mutations in the gene?
### Where did you find this information?
### Find a paper that describes an aspect of HBB's function

1. Go to [HackMD](https://hackmd.io/)
2. Copy these questions to a new document and save as Lab1.md
2. Fill in answers to each qustion
3. Export as HTML
3. Submit file on Canvas under Assignments

Here is a guide to composing documents using Markdown: [Markdown Cheatsheet](https://github.com/adam-p/markdown-here/wiki/Markdown-Cheatsheet)

On HackMD, you can collaborate on documents by sharing the URL. You can also download the document to your computer to save it, and re-upload it later. You can also drag images onto your document and it will upload them.


## 3. Exploration of [NCBI](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/)

## 4. Begin [Project 1]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url projects/2018-09-27-project-1 %})
Lists of databases:

- [Nucleic Acids Research](https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/45/D1/D1/2770636)
- [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_biological_databases#DNA_Databases)
- [OmicsTools](https://omictools.com/)

## 5. Intro to the Unix Shell

At a high level, computers do four things:

-   run programs
-   store data
-   communicate with each other, and
-   interact with us

Most people are familar interacting with a computer through windows, icons and pointers, collectively a *graphical user interphase*, or *GUI*. However, pretty much anything you can do in your favorite GUI (Windows or Mac), you can also do through a
**command-line interface**.

The heart of a CLI is a **read-evaluate-print loop**, or REPL:
when the user types a command and then presses the Enter (or Return) key,
the computer reads it,
executes it,
and prints its output.
The user then types another command,
and so on until the user logs off.

The program that you directly interact with on the command-line is called a **command shell**. A shell is a program like any other.
What's special about it is that its job is to run other programs
rather than to do calculations itself.
The most popular Unix shell is Bash,
the Bourne Again SHell
(so-called because it's derived from a shell written by Stephen Bourne).
Bash is the default shell on most modern implementations of Unix
and in most packages that provide Unix-like tools for Windows.

### Why bother?
Using Bash or any other shell
sometimes feels more like programming than like using a mouse.
However, with only a few keystrokes, the shell allows us to combine existing tools into 
powerful pipelines and handle large volumes of data automatically. This automation
not only makes us more productive but also improves the reproducibility of our workflows by 
allowing us to repeat them with a few simple commands.
In addition, the command line is often the easiest way to interact with remote machines and supercomputers.
Familiarity with the shell is near essential to run a variety of specialized tools and resources
including high-performance computing systems.

We can build on the command-line skills covered here
to tackle a wide range of scientific questions and computational challenges.

### A toy example of a bioinformatics project on the command line

We'll practice using the command line for bioinformatics with a toy example: a marine biologist named Nelle Nemo. 

Download this file:

[Link]({{ site.baseurl }}/files/data-shell.zip) 

to your desktop and unzip it. In lab, you can also access the folder in the `Class/BIT150/Lab_1` directory


Nelle just returned from a six-month survey of the
[North Pacific Gyre](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/North_Pacific_Gyre),
where she has been sampling gelatinous marine life in the
[Great Pacific Garbage Patch](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Pacific_Garbage_Patch).
She has 1520 samples in all and now needs to:

1.  Run each sample through an assay machine
    that will measure the relative abundance of 300 different proteins.
    The machine's output for a single sample is
    a file with one line for each protein.
2.  Calculate statistics for each of the proteins separately
    using a program her supervisor wrote called `goostats`.
3.  Compare the statistics for each protein
    with corresponding statistics for each other protein
    using a program one of the other graduate students wrote called `goodiff`.
    
The bad news is that if she has to run `goostats` and `goodiff` by hand,
she'll have to enter filenames and click "OK" 46,370 times
(1520 runs of `goostats`, plus 300*299/2 (half of 300 times 299) runs of `goodiff`).
At 30 seconds each, that will take more than two weeks and the chances of her typing all of those commands right are practically zero.  

We will see how using a command shell, this work can be automated. As a bonus,
once she has put a processing pipeline together,
she will be able to use it again whenever she collects more data.


To continue, we'll follow lessons 2 and 3 here: [Tutorial](https://deruncie.github.io/shell-novice/02-filedir/)

[Unix commands cheatsheat]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url supplements/2018-09-27-unix_commands %})


### If you want extra practice after completing the in-class tutorial, try working through the rest of the lessons on the Tutorial site.