---
layout: lab
title: Lab 6 - Genome Browsers
hidden: true
---

# Goals

1. Use the UCSC Genome Browser to view genomic features
2. Visualize alternative isoforms at a locus
3. Identify candidate regulator regions around a gene
	

# Activity

## Introduction to the UCSC Genome Browser

1. Go to: [UCSC Genome Browser](http://genome.ucsc.edu/)
> The UCSC Genome Browser was one of the first to develop a technique for visualizing annotations along a genome. There are specialized genome browsers for many species (mostly vertebrates). The same technology has been duplicated in many other sites:
>  
> ex:
> 
> - [Ensembl - similar to UCSC](http://www.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Gene/Summary?db=core;g=ENSG00000139618;r=13:32315474-32400266)
> - [TAIR - Arabidopsis](https://gbrowse.arabidopsis.org/cgi-bin/gb2/gbrowse/arabidopsis/?name=Chr1%3A1509103..1510341)

2. Click on **Genomes**
> This page lists the genome browsers avaiable. Each species has a separte browser. Within species, there are different **Assembly versions**. Each assembly has a different **coordinate system**. There are tools for mapping annotations from one assembly to another (either within or between species).

3. Let's use the Human Assembly **GRCh38/hg38** (the most recent version). Lets view the locus around the gene **TAZ**.
> There are several ways of navigating to a locus:
> 
> - Enter a search term in the search bar: ex. `TAZ` or `NM_181311`
> - Enter a genome region: ex. `chrX:154,411,556-154,421,720`, read as chr:start-stop.
> - Search for a specific sequencing using BLAT (similar to BLAST).

4. Orientation to the default view of the genome browser:
> Note these features:
> 
> - Assembly verion
> - Chromosome coordinates
> - Location of view on chromosome
> - Scale of current view
> - **Tracks**: rows of data. Delinited by boxes on the left side.
> - **Features**: contiguous regions with a single ID in each track.

5. There are too many tracks. Let's remove some.
> - Hover your mouse over the last box. It gets highlighted. Note the title in the middle of the box: *Repeating Elements by RepeatMasker*
> - Right-click on the box, and select **Hide**
> - Also hide the **Common SNPs(150)**,**GTEx**,**OMIM Alleles**, and **GENCODE v24** tracks. 

6. Change the format of the H3K27Ac track.
> H3K27Ac is a particular form of epigenetic modification that seems to be related to DNA accessibility for transcription factors.
> 
> - The default view shows a layered density plot for H3K27Ac values in 7 cell types. Click on the box on the left. This brings you to the info page for the track. We can specify that we want only the HUVEC cell type. Deselect the others, and click **Submit**.
> - We could also give a more condensed view of the track by right-clicking and selecting **Dense**. Explore the other options.

7. Add a track of **Pfam Domains**. Pfam is similar to the **Conserved Domain Database**. We used it earlier with **RPSBLAST** to find protein domains.
> Scroll down to the **Genes and Gene Predictions** section, find the **Pfam in UCSC Gene** menu, and select **pack**. Then click **refresh**. The track will appear in the display. You can drag it around ti find a better place to display.
> 
> Note that domains can be split across exons!

8. Adjust the display to see the neighboring genes
> - You can click and drag to move left and right.
> - You can use the **zoom out** buttons to expand the view. 
> - You can zoom in with the **zoom in** buttons, or by holding **Alt** and dragging over a region. If you zoom in enough, it will show you codons, and then even base pairs. To see, you may have to right-click on the left box of the top feature and select **full**.
> - You can highlight a region by holding **Option** and dragging over a region.

9. Export a Genome Browser view as a pdf.
> - When you have a view you like, you can click **View -> PDF/PS**, and select "Download the current browser graphic in PDF".

10. Export data based on regions.
> - Add the OMIM Alleles track. 
> - Select **Tools -> Data Integrator**
> - under **position or search term**, enter **TAZ**. If you leave it as is, it will use the current region of the browser
> - Under **Configure Data Sources**, select **Phenotype**, then **OMIM Alleles**, then click Add
> - Click **View table schema**. This brings up a new window that describes the data format for this track. It's a computable table!
> - Click **Get output**
> - A table will come up with format similar to BED listing the locations of OMIM variants inside the gene.
> - To view information on a particular variant, you can search for the OMIM ID at [OMIM](https://www.omim.org), or: Go back to the Genome Browser view, and click on the variant. This will bring up an info page on the variant, with links back to OMIM.

11. Add a new transcript.
> Say we identify a new transcript. Let's create a new track and feature to visualize this transcript.> 
> First, let's expand the **GENCODE v24** track to include all transcripts. Click on the track button on the left, and then by **Show**, select **show comprehensive set**. Click **Submit**
> Let's modify the third **TAZ** transcript to have a longer **exon 2**.
> 
> - Click on **Tools -> Tables Browser**. The **Tables Browser** is a way to download data from the Genome Browser. There's lots of things you can do with this. See **Using the Table Browser** for ideas. Today we'll use this to download a template BED file of the TAZ transcripts so that we can modify the 3rd transcript without having to re-write the whole thing.
> - Ensure **GENCODE v24** is selected under **group**, and **knownGene** is selected under table. The **region** defines the region that will be queried. 
> - By default, the **Table Browser** will include all transcripts that overlap with our query region. Remember that this included an overlapping gene: **DNASE1L1**. We don't want this transcript, so let's filter by gene **identifiers**. Click **paste list** and enter **TAZ**. Click **submit**.
> - We won't use the other filter, intersection, or correlation tools.
> - Under **output format**, select **BED - browser extensible data** to get the BED format.
> - Click **get output**. 
> - Add a custom track header by entering a name and description (say "my new transcripts!").
> - Leave the selection: **one BED record per Whole Gene**.
> - Click **get BED**.
> - You'll get a text-file output in the BED format. We're interested in modifying the 3rd transcript, so grab that line of text and copy it to **Notepad++**. Also copy the first row which is our header.
> - Extend the length of the 2nd exon by 300 bases (so the remaining exons remain **in-frame**).
> - To add this track to the Browser, click **Tools -> Data Integrator**
> - Under **Configure Data Sources / get more data**, select **custom tracks**.
> - Paste your track into the first box and click **Submit**.
> - Click **go** next to **view in Genome Browser**.
> - Does the transcript looks as you expected?

## Assignment

Answer the following questions:

1. You asked a question in the homework for Class 11. Repeat your question here and see if you can answer it!
1. Paste a screenshot of the browser display with your new transcript from #11 above.
1. What strand is the TAZ gene on?
2. List the 3 nearest genes upstream (towards the centromere) relative to TAZ
3. Where relative to gene features is the H3K27Ac presence highest?
4. Note the double-lines in the MultiZ alignments of other vertebrate species. What do the double-lines mean? (google, or look in the help pages)
5. Create a figure using the genome browser to highlight one potentially important feature around your gene that may be relevant to its role in disease.

> Create a genome browser view for your gene. 
> 
> - You could show just the gene. You could zoom out to show the neighboring region. You could zoom in on particular features you'd like to highlight. 
> - You can show multiple views if that helps describe your finding
> - Include at least two tracks, and refer to both in your description. Remove unnecessary tracks
