---
layout: lab
title: Lab 3 - HPC and Command Line BLAST
hidden: true
---

# Outline:
- review of for loops
- Intro to using a computer cluster
- Running BLAST from the command line
- Running more complex BLAST jobs

# Review of loops
In the homework, I asked you to write a script to process all pairs of files through the `goodiff` program. This requires **nested for loops**

Let's start in the `north-pacific-gyre/2012-07-03` data files folder.

We can see all the files we want to process with:

```
ls NE*.txt
```

**Note: some of you may have other `.txt` files in this folder. If you do, modify the above command to only list the data files**

To process all pairs of files, we want to create two variables to hold the names of the two files to process: `file1` and `file2`. Then we want to use **for loops** to substitute each possible pair of files for these two variables.

First, lets start by processing the first file against all others. You could use a script like this:

```
file1=NENE01729A.txt
for file2 in NE*.txt
do
 echo \$file2 is now: $file2. Processing $file1 $file2
 programs/goodiff $file1 $file2 >> output/goodiff_results.txt
done
```

No, we want to run this whole script again and again, but each time with a different `file1`. We can do this by writing a loop for file1, where the **body** of the loop is this first loop:

```
for file1 in NE*.txt
do
  echo \$file1 is now: $file1
  for file2 in NE*.txt
  do
   echo \$file2 is now: $file2. Processing $file1 $file2
   programs/goodiff $file1 $file2 >> output/goodiff_results.txt
  done
done
```

That's it!


# Intro to High Performance Computing

### Key ideas:

- The Farm cluster is a **shared resource**. It is important to follow some rules so that you do not interfere with other users.
- The Farm cluster has a head node and then a bunch of compute nodes
	- You log in from your computer to the head node, and then ask for time on a compute node. 
	- You have to move files from your computer to the cluster. Once there, the whole file system is shared among all nodes. You don't need to keep copying files
	- The cluster runs Linux (clone of Unix). You control it using Bash
	- There are lots of programs installed, and different versions of many programs. Use `modules` to select which programs you want to use. It takes care of the rest.
	- You can log in to Farm from anywhere as long as you have your username / password. This will be given to you (it's not your Kerberos login).

### Log in:
To log in, from a Unix terminal type:

```
ssh username@farm.cse.ucdavis.edu
```

Then enter your password. You will arrive at your personal **home directory**, which will be: `/home/username`. Only you can write / modify files in this directory.

### Directories:
There is a class directory called: `/group/bit150`. You can access these files, but they are locked - you cannot change them. If you want to share files with the class, you can put them in: `/group/bit150/share`. Change to each of these directories (using `cd`), and view their contents (using `ls`).

### Moving files on and off:
Open the `FileZilla` program. This program sets up a secure connection to the Farm file server and lets you move files on and off of the cluster. It works a lot like `Windows File Explorer`.

To use:

1. Select new site, enter: Host: `farm.cse.ucdavis.edu`, Port: `2022`, Protocol: `SFTP`, Logon Type: "Normal", User: `username`, Password: `password`, Click `Connect`.
2. On the left is a file explorer for your computer. Navigate to the `Z:/Classes/BIT150/Lab_3`.
3. On the right is a file explorer for Farm's file system. Create a directory called `Lab_3`. You can also do this in the terminal (`mkdir Lab_3`).
4. Find the file: `brca1.fasta`, and drag it onto Farm.
5. In the terminal, enter the command: `echo Some Text > new_file.txt`. In `FileZilla`, refresh the Farm file explorer. The file `new_file.txt` should appear. Double-click, or drag it to your computer.


## Running BLAST	

The BLAST programs are installed on Farm. They are fairly intensive programs, requiring a moderate amount of RAM, and sometimes a lot of time to run. 

**We do not want to run BLAST on the head node!** This could bog-down this computer and prevent others on the cluster from doing their work!

First, request an allocation on one of the compute nodes:

### Requesting an interactive job
```
srun -p bit150 -t 20 --pty bash -l
```
- `srun` is a command that asks for an allocation
- `-p bit150` asks to use the `bit150` partition. This means use the resources assigned to our class
- `-t 20` asks for 20 minutes. After this time, your allocation will shut down
- `--pty bash -l` asks for the allocation to run `Bash` just as if you opened a new terminal

Hit `Enter`, and then wait a minute. Eventually you will see some messages saying you are logged in to a job.

To see info on your job, type:
```
squeue -u username
```

### The blast program

Now that we have access to a powerful computer, we can use BLAST to search a database for our sequence.

Our sequence is in the file `brca1.fasta`, the file we moved to Farm. View the file with:

```
head brca1.fasta
```


#### Question: Is this a nucleotide of protein sequence?

### The FASTA format

The FASTA	format is a common format for storing sequence files. Each sequence has a header (**the metadata**), and then the sequence. The header is the first line, and begins with the `>` character. The rest of the line contains various annotations (a very compressed version of the GenBank format). Longer sequences are split over multiple lines. But the line breaks are irrelevant. Programs like BLAST know to keep reading the sequence until the end of the file. 

Multiple sequences can be held in the same file. They are separated by header lines.

The blast program that we will use is `blastp`. You can check if the program is installed by typing its name and giving the `-version` argument:

```
blastp -version
```

The default version on Farm is `2.2.31+`. This is an old version of the progam. We want to use version `2.6.0+`. To get this, we have to tell Farm that we want a different version. We can do this by typing: 

```
module load bio
blastp -version
```

The bio module includes many bioinformatics programs besides blast. 


Now, we can run blast. A run looks like this:

```
blastp -db /group/bit150/blast_databases/refseq_human_protein -query brca1.fasta -out brca1_blast.txt
```

- `blastp` is the program for protein-protein blast.
- `db /group/bit150/blast_databases/refseq_human_protein` specifies the blast database that we want to use. We select the `refseq_human_protein ` database in the `/group/BIT150/blast_databases/` directory
- `query brca1.fasta` specifies the query sequence
- `out brca1_blast.txt ` specifes we want the output stored in the file called `brca1_blast.txt `

Look at the file. It's long. 

**Hint** A good viewer is `less`. Type `less brca1_blast.txt`. You can scroll with the arrow keys, page down with `space`, and then quit `less` by typing `q`.

Or, you can download the file to your computer using `FileZilla`, and view it in `Notepad++`.

Let's modify the command. We can change the output style into a concise table. Rather than re-typing, use the up-arrow to get find the command. **Note:** or, you could use `history`. Now, instead of moving the cursor with the arrow keys, copy it to a Notepad++ document, and edit it there.

For clarity, it's often nice to break up long commands into several lines. You can do this by putting a `\` character at the end of each line.

```
blastp  \
   -db /group/bit150/blast_databases/refseq_human_protein \
   -query brca1.fasta \
   -out brca1_blast_table.txt \
   -outfmt 7   
```

I added the option `-outfmt 7`. This changes the format of the output to a table. See `blastp -help` for more formatting options.

You can copy this whole set of code and paste into the terminal. Now, look at this output file using `less`.

When you're done, exit the compute node by typing:

```
exit
```

**Always remember to exit when you're done - this frees up resources for others!**

#### Notes:

- There are many more options for the `blastp` program. You can view them with `blastp -help`, or [here](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK279675/)
- There are many databases that you could blast against. You can also create your own starting with a file of fasta sequences using the `makeblastdb` command. [Link](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK279688/)
- You can extract sequences from a database with the `blastdbcmd` program [Link](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK279689/)


## Running longer jobs with sbatch

The `srun` command is useful for testing commands and shorter programs. But it has limitations for longer or more intensive jobs.

- Sometimes it takes a long time to get an allocation. With `srun` you have to wait.
- With `srun`, you have to wait until your program is done and then remember to log out.

The preferred way to run computation on a cluster like Farm is by submitting jobs that run **non-interactively** using the command `sbatch`.

Launching a `sbatch` job looks like this:

```
sbatch -p bit150 -t 30 my_script.sh
```

This will tell the cluster to find a time to allocate resources to my job for 30 minutes, and then run the script `my_script.sh`

The key to using `sbatch` is writing a good script. The body of the script is the set of commands you would type in to Bash if you were there to control it. But you start the script with some special commands to tell the cluster how to run your job. 

The simplest script looks like this:

```
#!/bin/bash

module load bio

blastp  \
   -db /group/bit150/blast_databases/refseq_human_protein \
   -query brca1.fasta \
   -out brca1_blast_table.txt \
   -outfmt 7    
```

- The first line tells the cluster to run this script with the `bash` shell.
- The second tells it to load the bio module
- Then we give the command for running blast.

We can then modify this script to do longer, more intensive jobs:

### Look at the following fasta file:
`/group/bit150/Lab_3/mouse_protein_set1.fasta`

How is it different than `brca1.fasta`?

### Blast with a multi-fasta
We can blast many files at once by concatenating many sequences together into one file.
In a multi-fasta file, each sequence begins with a header line (denoted by the `>` character), and then has 1+ lines of sequence. If we submit a file like this to the BLAST programs, they will BLAST each sequence individually against the same database. This obviously takes longer than BLASTing one sequence, so we'll use `sbatch`:

The following script does a blast using a query file that includes 10 different sequences:

```
#!/bin/bash

module load bio

blastp  \
   -db /group/bit150/blast_databases/refseq_human_protein \
   -query /group/bit150/Lab_3/mouse_protein_set1.fasta \
   -out mouse_protein_set1_blast_table.txt \
   -outfmt 7    
```

## Modular scripts
The above script is fine, but it is a bit hard to read, and is also hard to modify. Say you wanted to blast a different gene against a different database? How would you change the script?

The way to write cleaner scripts is to use bash variables. We saw variables earlier when writing for loops. The concept here is the same. We can assign a **value** to a **variable** in the top of the script, and then use the variable later:

```
#!/bin/bash

module load bio

# declare database and query files
database=/group/bit150/blast_databases/refseq_human_protein
query=/group/bit150/Lab_3/mouse_protein_set1.fasta
output_file=mouse_protein_set1_blast_table.txt

blastp  \
   -db $database \
   -query $query \
   -out mouse_protein_set1_blast_table.txt \
   -outfmt 7
```

Now the call to `blastp` is much clearer. It's also often helpful to separate directories from file names, and base names from file extensions. A better script might look like this:
 
```
#!/bin/bash

module load bio

# declare database directory
database_dir=/group/bit150/blast_databases/

# declare input file directory
query_dir=/group/bit150/Lab_3

# declare output file directory
output_dir=.

# database
database=refseq_human_protein

# query
query=mouse_protein_set1

blastp  \
   -db $database_dir/$database \
   -query $query_dir/${query}.fasta \
   -out $output_dir/${query}_blast_table.txt \
   -outfmt 7
```

### Activities

1. Modify the above script to blast the `mouse_protein_set1.fasta` file against three of these databases:

```
refseq_human_protein
refseq_mouse_protein
refseq_zebrafish_protein
refseq_plant_protein
swissprot
```

2. Modifying the above script, write a **for loop** to blast each of the files in `/group/bit150/Lab_3/individual_genes` against one of the protein databases, saving each in it's own file in an output directory of your home directory.

## Notes

When submitting `sbatch` jobs, two important commands are:

- `squeue -p bit150`, or `squeue -u bit150-01`. These show you if your job is running
- `scancel -u bit150-01`. This cancels all your running jobs. You can also do: `scancel 15968444` to cancel a specific job numer


# Homework:
1. Find the amino acid sequence of your gene
2. Choose three of the blast databases on Farm. Here is a list:
>
| Database                 | Type    | program  |
|--------------------------|---------|----------|
|`refseq_human_protein`     | Protein | blastp   |
|`refseq_mouse_protein`     | Protein | blastp   |
|`refseq_zebrafish_protein` | Protein | blastp   |
|`refseq_plant_protein`     | Protein | blastp   |
|`swissprot`                | Protein | blastp   |
|`Cdd_NCBI`                 | Domains | rpsblast |
|`Pfam`                     | Domains | rpsblast |
| `Smart`                   | Domains | rpsblast |

3. Write a script to BLAST your sequence against these three databases. Note that the last three are databases of protein domains. These require the `rpsblast` program instead of `blastp`

4. Now, go to NCBI's blast server and run the same searches there. Compare the results. 
5. Write a Markdown document describing what you learned about your gene. Include your script from step 3 and your script from Activity #2 above. **Note**: when entering a script in Markdown, include a line with the `` ` `` before and after the code. This will format the script as a code block. 