---
layout: lab
title: Lab 7 - Genome-wide association study
hidden: true
---

# Goals

1. Use the GWAS Catalog to find variants associated with specific traits
2. Understand statistics reported in GWAS studies
3. Predict the functional effects of specific allelic variants
	


## Introduction to the GWAS Catalog

The GWAS Catalog is operated by the National Human Genome Research Institute and the European Bioinformatics Institute. The Catalog is a quality controlled, manually curated, collection of all published genome-wide association studies assaying at least 100,000 SNPs and all SNP-trait associations with p-values < 1.0 x 10<sup>-5</sup>. 

> There is a similar catolog in *Arabidopsis*: [AraGWAS](https://aragwas.1001genomes.org) developed within the *Arabidopsis* 1001 Genome project


## Activity

1) Go to: [GWAS Catalog](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas/)

The GWAS Catalog has several entry points to the database. You can get an overview of all SNP trait associations under **Diagram**, **Search** for specific variants, traits, publications, etc, **Download** all data or specific subsetsets, etc. We'll explore some of these functions

2) Click on **Diagram**.
> In this diagram, each colored dot represents a SNP-trait associations with p-value ≤ 5.0 × 10<sup>-8</sup>. These are considered "Genome-Wide significant" loci. There are a lot!
> 
> To highlight particular associations, we can filter this figure. First click on the "Metabolic disease" button on the left. This filters for ~300 associations with particular 
> 
> **Note:** This page is slow. Sometimes you have to wait for it to finish!
> 
> If you hover your mouse over a particular association, it will list the specific Metabolic disease, and you can click on the association for more information. 
> 
> You can filter more by typing a specific trait into the Filter box. 


3) Go back to the **Home**, and use the search bar to find loci associated with **height**.
> There are several ways of searching:
> 
> - Enter a disease name: ex. `breast cancer`
> - Enter a genome region: ex. `6:16000000-25000000`, read as chr:start-stop.
> - Enter a SNP name: ex. `rs7329174`.

If you type `height` into the bar, it'll suggest several types of `height` traits. Note that this is a **controlled vocabulary**. This is necessary to group different studies together because each may use the word `height` in different ways. 

> Click on the first: `body height`.
> 
> On the `Trait: body height` page, the first box describes the trait. On the right is a buttom for `Trait in OLS`. The OLS is a trait-ontology. Click the button and find two related traits.

Further down the `Trait: body height` page, you find a table of associations. How many are there?

> **Question:** Are all these associations with `body height` per se? 

> What is the first association listed? Here are some definitions of the columns in the table:
> 
> - **RAF**: Risk/effect allele frequency in controls 
> - **P-value**: change of a random allele being at least this strongly associated with the trait.
> - **OR**: Odds ratio associate with SNP
> - **Beta**: Effect size of the association (in this case change in height if you carry the alternate (ie risk) allele
> - **CI**: 95% confidence interval for the effect size
> - **Mapped gene**: Any known genes in this region
>
> **Task:** Find the genomic location of this variant
> 
> **Question:** Why is this variant listed first? Is it the most important?

> Scroll down to the bottom of the trait page. There is a **Manhattan Plot** of all the associations with body height. 
> 
> **Question:** Are there any regions of the genome that seem to have a lot of asociations? Few assocations?

4) Click on the a SNP with a large effect on height.

> Has this locus been association with height in other studies? 
> 
> Has it been association with other traits?
> 
> What alleles are known?

Once you have a particular SNP selected, this is where the bioinformatic tools of EMBL really shine.

> There are several buttons on the right of the `Variant information` box. These all link to other sites with specific types of information on this variant. 

5) Click on **Genomic context**. 
> This brings you to a genome browser view similar to what we worked with last week. Play around with the different tracks and see what kind of information you can find.

6) Click on **Genes and regulation**. 
> This page predicts the effect of this particular variant on things like gene regulation or function.
> 
> **Question** how can this information be used with GWAS? Should we infer that these specific regulatory or functional changes impact human height? Why or why not?

7) Click on **Population genetics**

> Check the allele frequencies in different population. Do certain populations have high prevelance of this SNP? 
>
> On this page, there is a lot more information about this variant. On the left, you'll find a link to a page on **Linkage disequilibrium**. Click on this. 
> 
> Choose two populations and view their **LD plot**s for this variant. How similar are the LDs among populations? Find another variant in each population that has high LD with your SNP.

8) Lets use `R` to do some additional analyses of these associations.

> Back on the `Trait: body height` page, click on **Download Catalog data** and save the file on your desktop.
> 
> Then, open **R studio**, and load the following libraries:

```
library(readr)
library(dplyr)
library(ggplot2)
```

Now, load the GWAS table. Your code should look something like this:


```
setwd('~/Desktop')
snps <- read_delim("gwas-association-downloaded_2018-11-08-EFO_0004339-withChildTraits.tsv", "\t", escape_double = FALSE, trim_ws = TRUE)
```

When the data are imported, **R** prints outt a summary of each of the columns of the data.

You can also do:

```
View(snps)
```

There are a lot of extra columns that we're not going to use. I suggest getting rid of these like this:

```
snps <- select(snps,c('DISEASE/TRAIT','CHR_ID','CHR_POS','CONTEXT','PVALUE_MLOG','OR or BETA'))
```
> Our first analysis will be do repeat the **Manhattan plot** from the GWAS Catalog website.
> 
```
snps
```
> First, note that our table contains traits other than just 'Height'. Look at all the traits like this:
```
unique(snps$`DISEASE/TRAIT`)
```
>
> We only want `Height`, so use the `filter()` function:
```
snps = filter(snps,`DISEASE/TRAIT` == 'Height')
snps
```
>
> Now, lets plot the `PVALUE_MLOG` column. However, if we do this now, it will not be ordered in any meaningful way. So, lets first `arrange` the table in order of chromosome and position:
```
snps <- filter(snps,CHR_ID != 'X')
snps <- arrange(snps,as.numeric(CHR_ID),CHR_POS)
snps
```
> Now, ote that the snps are in order along the chromosome
> 
> Now, we can simply make a plot like this:
```
plot(snps$PVALUE_MLOG,col = snps$CHR_ID)
```

> **Question:** Which chromosome has the marker with the strongest association with **height**?

Now, lets use the `CONTEXT` column and make plot of how many SNPs are within each type of genome feature. You can do that with this code:

```
ggplot(snps,aes(CONTEXT)) + geom_bar() + 
	theme(axis.text.x=element_text(angle=45,hjust=1,size=10))
```
> **Question:** Which two genomic features have the most associated SNPs with **height**?

## Assignment

Repeat the activity above for a disease or trait of your choice. Turn in answers to each of the questions listed above.
