---
layout: project
title: Project 2 - building a genetic model of a trait
hidden: true
---

## Project 2 - building a genetic model of a trait

**Define model**

The objective of this project is to draw together multiple sources of information to build a model, or hypothesis, about the cause of a disease or other trait. I want you to go beyond the explanations for why a particular gene causes a trait that you find in databases like **OMIM**, or **GeneCards**. Consider the following hypotheses:

1. The genes that cause a disease function in the same networks or pathways
2. Genes with similar functions cause similar diseases
3. The most important mutations occur in particular regions of a genome (genes, exons, promoters)

I want you to explore these hypotheses with respect to a specific trait or disease. Can you find evidence that supports each of these hypotheses? If so, can you use these ideas to guide your genetic model? If not, why not? What does that suggest about your trait?

For this project, please work in teams of 2.

First, choose a gene associated with a trait. You can use the same trait you used in Project 1 if you'd like. Again, you will have the most success if you choose a trait in a model system (Human, mouse, or Arabidopsis).

**[Enter your gene and trait here](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Tdm3W4fI42nl6Ha9YmtxxoREfwVDhhaxaXBd6jQhM8Q/edit?usp=sharing)**

Once you have chosen your trait, begin by outlining how you could test each of the hypotheses. What information do you need to begin?

Over the next several weeks, we will cover several bioinformatics tools that can be used to address these questions. As we learn a tool, apply it to your trait, and collect the results. At the end, synthesis your results as much as you can into a genetic model for your trait.

**Due**: 11/14/17