---
layout: project
title: Project 3 - Identifying the source of virulence
hidden: true
---

## Project 3 - Identifying the source of virulence

You task for this project is to identify genes or genomic features of the virulent *Eschericia coli* O104:H4 strain TY-2482 that might be responsible for its extreme virulence during the 2011 outbreak in Germany and France. 

The overall project should involve:

1. Select a new bioinformatic tool that we didn't use in lab. This could be new software, or a new database.
2. Use this tool to analyze the outbreak TY-2482 strain, as well as the reference a-virulent strain: Ec55989.
3. Identify differences that are unique to the TY-2482 strain
4. Look in the literature to see if these differences have been reported for the outbreak strain
5. Produce a report detailing your analysis, methods, and results.

### Options for the bioinformatics tool include:

- [Card: The Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database](https://card.mcmaster.ca/home). The main tool is the **Resistance Gene Identifier**. Unfortunately, the website tool doesn't work right now (at least for me). But it's available on Farm. See details below. This is the most difficult of the tools to use, but also the most useful. You'll earn 5 bonus points if you succeed on this!
- [ResFinder 3.1](https://cge.cbs.dtu.dk/services/ResFinder/) from the Center for Genomic Epidemiology
- [VirulenceFinder 2.0](https://cge.cbs.dtu.dk/services/VirulenceFinder/) from the Center for Genomic Epidemiology
- [PHASTER](http://phaster.ca/) 
- [VFDB: Virulence Factors of Pathogenic Bacteria]() The BLAST database has been downloaded and is available on Farm here: `/group/bit150/Project_3/VFDB/VFDB_setA_pro.fas`
- Others (check with Professor Runcie first)

### For the tool that you choose, you need to:

1. Learn what the tool is designed to do. How does it work? What input data does it require? What results does it provide?
2. Find and read the tool's manual. (Most of the manuals are pretty sparse)
3. Decide what input files are most important. You can use any of the analysis files we created in labs 8 and 9. Final versions of these files are available on Farm here: `/group/bit150/Project_3/`. A description of each file is provided on Canvas under `Files/Project_3`
4. Run the tool for the TY-2482 genome and the Ec55989 genome. Describe how you ran it, and if you used a script, provide the script.
5. Compare the results for the two isolates. Identify differences. If you can download results as a table, you can use `R` to help analyze, but this is not required - you can do comparisons by hand. It's not necessary that you identify **all** differences, but I expect you to be able to identify at least 1 interesting one.
6. Choose at least one of the program's default options and change it to a different value. Report which option you changed, what it changed in the results, and why you think that happened.
6. Create a report of your analysis answering each of the above questions.


### Notes:

#### These two papers report on a number of analyses of the TY-2482 strain:

- [Open-Source Genomic Analysis of Shiga-Toxin–Producing E. coli O104:H4](http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/nejmoa1107643#t=article)
- [Comprehensive Characterization of Escherichia coli O104:H4 Isolated from Patients in the Netherlands](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4667096/)
- [Epidemic Profile of Shiga-Toxin–Producing Escherichia coli O104:H4 Outbreak in Germany](http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1106483#t=article)

The papers are also available on Canvas under `Files/Project_3`. I don't expect you to read all of these papers. But when you get your results, consult any of these (or others if needed) to find support for your conclusions. This could be as simple as: "This paper also reported XX gene in the virulent strain".

#### Results

Some of the tools will produce results that are very long. I don't expect you to comprehensively study the results. I want you to spend enough time looking through them to identify differences between the strains. If you can get a concise summary of the results, present this as a figure or table in your report. If not, you can include your full results as a supplement. In your report, include enough detail that I can tell that you succeeded in running the tool.

#### Tool-specific notes:


**CARD / RGI**

- The website tool doesn't work anymore. However I've installed in on Farm. To load the program, use:

```
module load conda3
source activate CARD
```

- The tool's manual is available here: [Link](https://github.com/arpcard/rgi). This includes demonstrations of commands.
- The output of the tool is a tsv table `.txt` and a json file `.json`. The latter output can be downloaded and uploaded to the CARD website to create some neat visualizations.
- There are also neat visualizations from the command-line using `rgi heatmap`. To use these, move the `.json` results files to a new directory and specify this directory with the `--input` argument.

**PHASTER**

- you can concantenate your sequences using this tool: [Link](http://www.bioinformatics.org/sms2/combine_fasta.html)

**VFDB**

- This is not a program itself, it is a BLAST database. To use, you have to run either `blastp` or `psiblast` on Farm and collect the results.
- I recommend using the option: `-outfmt "6 qaccver saccver stitle evalue"`. It will provide a more concise report
- I also recommend that you use an e-value cutoff of 1e-100

#### Rules:

This project should be done individually. I expect each of you to figure out how to use your tool individually. You'll have lab on Thursday 12/6 to work on the project, and you can consult anyone during the period, but please don't discuss your work after the end of the lab period. Please use email / Canvas / Slack to ask questions of the Professor or TA.


**Due**: 12/12/18 at 12:00pm