---
layout: project
title: Project 2 - Bioinformatics research through data integration 
hidden: true
---

## Project 2 - Bioinformatics research through data integration

The objective of this project is to draw together multiple sources of information to gain insight into a biological problem. Over the next few weeks, we will explore several types of data integration in class and lab. Your task to is to take these ideas and apply them to a gene, trait, variant, or other biological feature of your choosing to come up with new knowledge. 

Specifically:

1. Choose a biological feature, such as a gene, genetic variant, pathway, etc.
2. Find two (or more) databases that contain complementary information
3. Use data integration techniques to query and analyze your databases and associate the data to create new knowledge about your feature. This will generally involve creating and merging different data tables.
4. Include a visualization to support your analysis
5. Describe why your analysis is useful. What did you learn? What could you do with these results?

Rules:

1. Please work in groups of 2. Enter your group and project info here:
	- [Google Sheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1xUxmdswkoRftelVMp1490LKiibjioPi8gU5va-tyXkU/edit?usp=sharing)
2. Start early. Finding appropriate databases will take time, as will figuring out how to do the data integration.
1. The databases that you choose should provide multiple entries to your analysis.
	- For example, a gene interaction database should identify multiple genes that interact with your gene. Or a gene function database should identify multiple genes that share the same/similar function.
2. Don't simply repeat one the analyses we do in lecture or lab. We've looked at blast databases, and will look at integrating gene networks with gene function data, integrating variation data in a genome browser, and genetic association data with genone features. You can do similar analyses, but at least use different data types.

Outcomes:

Create a report (in Markdown) detailing your analysis. Also upload any data tables that you use or create in your analysis, and any scripts that you write.

Discoving something new is challenging. You will be rewarded for creativity and effort.

**Due**: 11/13/17