---
layout: project
title: Project 1 - Mining bioinformatics databases
hidden: true
---

The goal of this project is to explore online public databases and discover information on a gene that may be relevant to its role in diseases or other traits.

First choose a trait. Human diseases work well because there have been study so intensely, but other characteristics of humans, animals, plants, or even bacteria can work. I recommend sticking to model systems (human, mouse, Arabidopsis) - there is much more information about these organisms in most databases.

Once you have chosen your trait, you need to find a gene that has been linked to that trait.
A useful place to start for Human traits is the [Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man](www.omim.org) databases. [Wikipedia](https://www.wikipedia.org/), or just [Google](www.google.com) also work. 

Here are some trait - gene pairs as examples:

<!--table-->
| Trait              | Gene  |
|--------------------|-------|
| Cystic Fibrosis    | CFTR  |
| Acondroplasia      | FGFR3 |
| Breast Cancer      | BRCA1 |
| Alzheimers disease | APOE  |
| Type-2 Diabetes    | INS   |
| Sprinter gene      | ACTN3 |
| Shade-response     | PHYB  |
| Flower defects     | AP1   |
<!--endtable-->

You're goal in **Projects 1 and 2** is to build a model for why mutations in this gene are associated with your trait. 

For **Project 1**, as a class I want you to explore as many different databases as possible to build a catalog of types of bioinformatics information available for different classes of genes. I want each of you to choose one database and prepare a Wiki page documenting the database. Use Markdown to compose your page. You can use the [HackMD](https://hackmd.io/) tool. Provide answers and links or images to address as many of the following questions as possible. Organize the information in a readable way. We will collect these into a class Wiki site at the end.


- What type of data does the database hold? What types of biological questions could use this database to address? 
- Where does the data come from? Who collects it, currates it, and publishes it?
- How are the data stored? In what format?
- What tools are available for accessing the data?
- Are there restrictions placed on how you are allowed to use the data? What is it's license? What does this mean?
- Find a paper that cites the database. Hint: use [Google scholar](https://scholar.google.com/). What was the study and why did they use this database?
- How many entries are there for your gene / mutation / disease?
- Describe one entry. Provide a direct link to this entry. What did you learn about your gene?
- Describe some types of biological questions that you could use this database to address.

Here are some rules: 

- Every student must choose a different database. There are 1000s of databases available. Usefull lists
can be found [here](https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/45/D1/D1/2770636/The-24th-annual-Nucleic-Acids-Research-database) and [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_biological_databases#DNA_Databases). When you choose a database, enter it in the google doc [here](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1gpUUcnm7zhglA4vG8o2KivsalVzhVJmwRXBPyTFdBoE/edit?usp=sharing). 
Before you choose your database, ensure that someone else hasn't chosen that one first!
- The only limitation on the database is that it contains information on your groups gene or disease. Find a database
that looks interesting!

For **Project 2**, you can refer back to this class resource to identify types of data that you can integrate to build a model for your gene.

**Note: If you find a databases that you want to explore that indexes something other than genes, ask**

----

Next: :doc:`project-2`
